Add episode 6: challenges for agile way of working in science (#15)
escience-academy/lesson-agile-escience: _episodes/06-agile-in-research.md

---
title: "Challenges for Agile way of working in research"
teaching: 15
exercises: 20
questions:

> - "What are challenges for agile way of working in research and how do I solve them?"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "What are challenges for an agile way of working in research and how do I solve them?"
```

objectives:
- "Know how to do waterfall projects in an Agile way"
- "Know how to deal with different expertise in a team"

> - "Remember that you should fit methodology to your way of working"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Remember to fit the methodology to your way of working"
```

- "Know how to deal with uncertainty and dependencies in projects"
keypoints:

> - "Agile methodologies can be adapted so they work well in a research setting"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- "Agile methodologies can be adapted so that they work well in a research setting"
```

---

In this episode we will discuss and learn about challenges that arise when applying
agile principles to research projects.

> ## Discussion

> > What are challenges for an agile way of working specific to research?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> What are the challenges for an agile way of working that are specific to research?
```

>
> > ## Solution
> > ### Uncertainty Challenge

> > > When doing science, the time required to implement a solution is ambiguous and depends on unknowns such as

Reviewer: I think this should be made a little stronger - when I try to explain research software engineering to devs in e.g. industry the response I get is often "We also have big uncertainties in expected dev time, and requirements can/do change. Why can't you just do agile like we do?". I think the main difference is the magnitude of the uncertainty (often much greater) but also that requirements don't just get modified, but change by 90 degrees based on outcomes of experiments etc i.e. it's predictably unpredictable. You are trying to plan development in a way that hedges against this to some extent, but the magnitude is so high that it can render certain agile methods unsuitable.

> > outcomes of investigations and experiments or data availability.
> > ### Cultural challenge

> > > A scientist is traditionally used to working individually in an isolated silo.

Reviewer: Do we mention the lack of version control practices here or is that already implicit?

> > > Also management might be hesitant to let teams self-manage.

Reviewer: Do we need to give examples of who we mean by 'management' here?

Reviewer 2: Yes, I'm curious about this one too. I would actually say that management in academia(I imagine that being the research group leader, university management, etc?) is not at all into micromanaging. It's mostly the nature of the funding and projects that would hamper an agile way of working.

Author: Indeed it's the nature of funding and projects and not necessarily the management. Although most research group leaders are IMO a driving force of individualistic work culture. I've changed it to reflect the larger 'forces':
'> > Tasks in academia are often attributed to individuals and not to teams. A PhD-project is by default set up as a one-person project.'

> > Given this individualistic culture it is often intimidating to start with Agile practices.
> > ### Waterfall project setup challenge

> > > Scientific projects are often setup in long-term project timelines following a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > Scientific projects are often set up in long-term project timelines following a
```

> > > Waterfall method.

Reviewer: Is this true? I agree that some proposals can be very specific about what will be created but most research projects I've seen are similar to PerfectFit, which just states what the software must do (qualitatively). Components are rarely prescribed in a manner I would consider to be 'waterfall'.

Reviewer: But I do agree that e.g. Copernicus projects do indeed follow a very strict, waterfall approach in their contracts, so maybe that is what is being thought of here.

> > ### Large-scale projects challenge

> > > Emergent design in iterative sprints does not always lead to the best large-scale functionality.

Reviewer: I don't understand what "large-scale" is referring to in this context. The number of users is large?

> > ### Team dedication challenge

> > > Agile is often explained with the idea of a team fully dedicated to a single project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > Agile is often explained in the context of a team fully dedicated to a single project.
```

> > > In academia team members are often involved in numerous projects in and outside of the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > In academia, team members may often be involved in numerous projects in and outside of the team.
```

> > > ### Product owner challenge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > ### Product Owner challenge
```

> > > For a team running multiple research projects, who acts as product owner?

Reviewer: Are we mixing SCRUM and Agile up a bit here?

Reviewer: Probably doesn't matter

> > ### Distributed expertise challenge
> > In Agile methodologies it is often assumed that a task can be picked up by any team member.

> > > However, in science different team members often have specialized in certain domains or technologies,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > In science, however, different team members have often specialized in certain domains or technologies,
```

> > > and it makes more sense to assign specific tasks to members with a specific expertise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > and it makes more sense to assign particular tasks to members with a relevant expertise.
```

> > > ### What is value challenge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > ### What is "value" challenge
```

> > > The goal of Agile way of working is to maximize value for the customer,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > The goal of the Agile way of working is to maximize value for the customer,
```

> > > but what is value in research? And who is the customer?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> > but what is "value" in research? And who is the "customer"?
```

provide time for research and discovery.
They are either timeboxed or their definition of done is when the specified research objectives are met.
- **Do the least understood work first**: Start with the most uncertain tasks and increment from there.
- **Deviate from the plan**: The sprint plan is not set in stone,
teams should 'negotiate the scope of the Sprint Backlog' when needed.
- **Relax "Definition of Done"**: To keep a fast discovery pace,
exploratory work doesn't need to meet the same strict criteria as regular tasks.

----------------------------------------------------
### Cultural challenge
A scientist is traditionally used to working individually in an isolated silo.
Also management might be hesitant to let teams self-manage.
Given this individualistic culture it is often intimidating to start with Agile practices.
#### Solutions:
- **Implement flexibly**: You should fit the methodology to the way of working.
'Process-rigidity is the antithesis of agility.'
- **Emphasize the "why"**: Focus on the "why" for the change to agile instead of
"what" to do to make the change.

----------------------------------------------------
### Waterfall project setup challenge

> Scientific projects are often setup in long-term project timelines following a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scientific projects are often set up in long-term project timelines following a
```

Waterfall method.
#### Solutions:
- Clear communication is key. Inform your collaborators on your way of working and update them frequently.

> - Actually projects that follow the Waterfall method often do not make the targets set out at the start of the project.

Reviewer: As written this doesn't really seem like a "solution". Also, in many big projects that use waterfall-like project management then failure to meet the targets can mean not being paid.

----------------------------------------------------
### Large-scale projects challenge
Emergent design in iterative sprints does not always lead to the best large-scale functionality.
#### Solutions
-  It makes sense to do a few design sprints to set out the bigger plan before embarking on a project.
- The [Architectural Runway](https://www.scaledagileframework.com/architectural-runway/)
approach revolves around more large-scale "intentional architectures".

----------------------------------------------------
### Team dedication challenge

> Agile is often explained with the idea of a team fully dedicated to a single project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agile is often explained in the context of a team fully dedicated to a single project.
```

> In academia team members are often involved in numerous projects in and outside of the team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In academia, team members may often be involved in numerous projects in and outside of the team.
```

#### Solutions:
- **Implement flexibly**: Again: You should fit the methodology to the way of working.
Start from where your team's activities do overlap and where teamwork seems most beneficial.
- **Keeping track**: Experiment and iterate on ideas to find the best way to keep track of
the different projects in your team. You can start with a Kanban board and backlog for each project seperately.

----------------------------------------------------

> ### Product owner challenge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Product Owner challenge
```

For a team running multiple research projects, who acts as product owner?
#### Solutions:
- Each project has its own 'project owner' (usually a team member) that takes
the role of product owner for that project.

------------------------------------------------
### Distributed expertise challenge
In Agile methodologies it is often assumed that a task can be picked up by any team member.

> However, in science different team members often have specialized in certain domains or technologies,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In science, however, different team members have often specialized in certain domains or technologies,
```

> and it makes more sense to assign specific tasks to members with a specific expertise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and it makes more sense to assign particular tasks to members with a relevant expertise.
```

#### Solutions:
- Not everyone has to be involved in everything!

> - Be explicit and open in each team members expertise and how that fits best to the different projects.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Be explicit and open about each team member's expertise and how it fits best within the different projects.
```

----------------------------------------------------

> ### What is value challenge

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### What is "value" challenge
```

The goal of Agile way of working is to maximize value for the customer,

> but what is value in research? And who is the customer?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
but what is "value" in research? And who is the "customer"?
```

#### Solutions:
- Discuss this in your team! Our proposition:

>     - Our customers: The Scientific Community at Large

Reviewer: Agreed, although this is most frequently specific scientific communities, non-scientific communities (e.g. research software for researchers in the humanities etc), potentially "customers" like the EU Commission...
